so this talk is called primordial black
holes
and if we're going to talk about black
holes i suppose we ought to do a little
bit
to just recap on what a black hole is
for anyone who's
joining and has missed that bit the
simple explanation is that it relates to
the idea of escape velocity if you were
to
build a giant cannon as someone has done
here
and fire it out into space if you fired
it uh
fast enough then the cannonball would
never come back
you fire it slowly it'll go a little way
land in the ocean
fire it further it'll travel maybe even
over the horizon
and then land if you fired it at 17
500 miles an hour it will go right round
the earth
in orbit and hit you in the back of the
head
and if you go at 25 000 miles an hour
then you've given it enough energy
to climb all the way out of the gravity
well caused by the earth
and so it'll never come back
and that's very well understood in the
easy mathematics from uh
good old isaac newton to let us work all
of that
out not difficult at all
but we also have to bear in mind the
speed of light
and here's galileo with his first
attempt
in 1638 to try and measure the speed of
light
he sent his poor long-suffering
assistant to a distant hilltop with a
lamp
and was with instructions to
uncover it when he saw the
uh light from galileo's lamp
and then when galileo saw the assistance
lamp he would uncover his own
and so forth it would flip-flop
backwards and forwards
and the idea was that from the
round-trip delay you'd be able to work
out how fast
the speed of sound is of course it
didn't work because
the speed of light is so much faster
than the human reaction time
and there would be no way that you could
do this
i said the speed of sound just now
because i'm getting ahead of myself
the idea would work for the speed of
sound if you made a loud noise
you would just about be able to do this
experiment because
it's uh slow enough that you would be
able to react in time
but galileo concluded that the speed of
light
was at least 10 times faster than that
of
speed of sound so it wasn't a completely
null result
but it led to an experiment
or a set of observations by olay roma um
in 1676 where he did the same experiment
but he enlisted the help of jupiter as
his glamorous assistant
on the far hilltop and the moon io
going around it going into eclipse took
the place of the
lamp being covered and uncovered and by
measuring the time delay
between the appearance and disappearance
of io
at different points on the earth's orbit
he was able to
use that round trip delay to calculate
the speed of light
essentially at some times he was able to
have the earth here at g
and measure the c g
time would determine when i o
disappeared but at other times at point
f
you would have the extra distance and so
the disappearance of i o would appear to
be late
and from that uh delay he could
calculate
the speed that light had take across the
gap from g
to f and he got quite a close answer 22
um
sorry 220 000 kilometers per second
compared to nearly 300 000 which is the
modern number that we all use
so the speed of light is not infinite
and that led to the realization
that uh there was a possibility
of a very massive object
having an escape velocity greater than
the speed of
light this was first pointed out by the
clergyman astronomer
john mitchell and he calculated that a
star
500 times the size of the sun
so with the same overall density but
just 500 times
larger would have an escape velocity of
the speed of light
and reason that such a monster would be
invisible
and he came out with the name for this
as the dark star hypothesis
and it fitted with some of the
observations because it seemed that we
weren't
seeing stars that were of arbitrarily
large mass
the largest seem to be 1 two three
hundred times the mass of
the sun and anything bigger than that
just didn't seem to exist
and so he reasoned that maybe the reason
we weren't seeing such things was
because they were
invisible rather than because they
weren't out there
this dark star idea
i'm just going to throw this in as well
because it's uh
important to uh understanding of the
speed of light
this is the michaels and morley
experiments at the turn of the
century the 1890s and the idea was to
try and measure the speed of the la
of light very accurately in the lab in
two directions
at the same time at right angles to each
other
so the idea is you have a light source
you send the beam into the center of the
apparatus where there's a
part silvered mirror and the light path
is split
part of it goes onto the flat mirror
here
and then back to the detector the other
part takes a different route
and it re recombined back at the
detector
so it makes an interferometer you can
very very
accurately measure any change in the
time of flight of the light beams in the
two directions
because they will arrive either in phase
or out of phase with each other
and the whole apparatus is mounted on
this rotating turntable on a very smooth
mercury bath
so they could orient it around in
different directions
and see if rotating the table made
any difference to the
result now the idea actually was to
try to work out if they could find a
direction where
one of the beams was in the direction
of motion of the earth through
the luminiferous ether that was
supposedly the
medium in which light moved and if the
earth was moving through it
it would be have a preferred direction
and we would be able to measure the
speed of light
being different in that direction moving
with the movement of the earth as
opposed to at right angles to it
but rather contrary to common sense they
found
nothing whatsoever by way of change no
matter what they did
and this uh proved that the speed of
light
was independent of the direction
of motion or the velocity of motion of
the source
so if we was pointing in the direction
of the earth's motion around the sun
or the whole of the solar system through
the galaxy these are really quite high
speeds
but it made no difference compared to
the motion at right angles to that
quite contrary to galilean ideas of
relativity and of course this was one of
the foundation points
for einstein
and einstein produced his theory of
special relativity
all about uh what happens with constant
motion
in 1905 and then 10 years later followed
it up with general relativity which
deals with gravity and acceleration
and it was in the same year that he
published
his groundbreaking paper on
his theory of gravity general relativity
that uh this chap
carl schwartz child was able to use
einstein's equations to prove
that a sufficiently
massive dense object could be
such that no light would be able to
escape from it
and produce the formula that you see at
the bottom there
which is one of the easiest formulas
around and
it's just that the radius r is equal to
2 g over c squared those are constants g
is the strength of gravity straight out
of newton's formula
and c is this constant speed of light
and m is the mass of the object so if
you ignore the c
squared and the g because those are
really just to get our units correct
then it's telling us that the radius of
the object
is just proportional to its mass more
mass
bigger less mass smaller
and it would define a boundary
in space and time between the inner
and outer worlds either side of what's
called the event horizon because
no event that occurs inside the
black hole can have any influence on any
event
outside no information no
uh nothing can escape so this
is the schwarzschild radius and it marks
this uh
position of the event horizon and as i
say nothing can get out
you cannot see what's going on inside
and if you crossed inside you would be
able to discover
what was happening in there but you'd
never be able to come out
and tell anybody about it
and just to give you some ideas on on
that if we uh
take an object of the mass of the sun
and we calculate the schwarzschild
radius for it
it's three kilometers so you would have
to squeeze the whole of the mass of the
sun
down into a region three kilometers in
radius
in order for it to form a black hole
and have an event horizon around it
likewise you could do the same with the
earth but you would have to squeeze it
from its current
radius down to just one and a half
centimeters across
very tiny indeed something slightly
larger than a ball bearing or a marble
with the mass of the earth would be a
black hole
and there's nothing particularly magic
about the size they could come in
all sizes that's just simply that the
mass determines the
radius using that formula
indeed the ones that we know about that
exists that have been observed
or their effects have been observed are
either
those that form from the collapse
of giant stars so-called stellar black
holes
they have stars as their origin and
these
type 2 core collapse supernovae of uh
large stars greater than 10 and a half
solar masses
will collapse down and form a residual
core
of five maybe 10 solar masses
of black hole
on the other hand we have intermediate
the the supermassive black holes
which live at the center of galaxies and
these
are much much more massive the one that
we have in the center of
uh our galaxy sagittarius a star
is four million solar masses but that's
a tiddler
the one that they imaged in this picture
here
in m87 is
a thousand times more massive again so
four billion
solar masses compressed into a region
that uh
is dense enough to form a black hole
and we think every galaxy has one of
these supermassive black holes
and indeed there seems to be a
relationship between the
mass of the galaxy and the mass of the
central black hole
such that a tenth of a percent of the
total mass of the galaxy
tends to be the mass of the black hole
in the center
and we don't know which came first the
chicken or the egg
we don't know if the black hole controls
the formation of the galaxy
or if the galaxy controls the amount of
mass that falls into the black hole
or perhaps the two are related in some
more complicated way
that's an area of interesting research
we do also have these other quirky
objects called globular clusters
and these orbit around the outside of
galaxies like the milky way we have
about 400 of them
buzzing around the outside of the milky
way rather like bees around a honeypot
and they contain maybe half a million
stars each
and some of them if not all of them seem
to contain
an intermediate mass black hole that is
intermediate between the sort of stellar
mass of
10 solar masses and these uh
supermassive ones in the centers of
galaxies
and they also seem to obey that 0.1
percent
law so that they are fitting the same
graph that you get with galaxies so it's
suggestive that these are some sort of
mini galaxy perhaps they're the cores
of small galaxies that have uh
then lost all of their outer regions
that have been stolen
by their parent galaxy like the milky
way so just to illustrate that point we
see a range of these sizes
from the intermediate mass in
globular clusters like m15 or g1 that's
a bit bigger that orbits around
andromeda
through to the ones in the spiral
galaxies and the real monsters inside
the giant elliptical galaxies
and they all lie on this nice 0.1
curve so
those are the black holes that we know
about that are out there
in the universe today and that we've got
reasonably strong evidence of their
existence
now i'm just going to skip ahead a
little bit because we need to crack on
and talk about the work of stephen
hawking a little bit
and in particular stephen's masterpiece
which
was that he realized in 1974 that
black holes had a problem with the law
of thermodynamics
and his research into this led him to
write a paper
that really shocked the scientific world
and made him famous
and it made him famous because it was
the first paper to successfully combine
the three great pillars of modern
physics
into one mathematical entity
quantum mechanics general relativity and
thermodynamics
putting all of these together without it
blowing up in his face
was a real achievement and it came out
with the
theory that black holes ain't so black
which is actually the chapter of one of
his books
another chapter in his book chapter 4
and
the brief history of time deals with the
reason why
this comes to be and it's to do with the
quantum mechanics aspect
and the heisenberg uncertainty principle
and this really tells us in in the very
short version of
of this that we cannot know
the amount of energy of a quantum system
precisely
it tells us that the more precisely we
try
to measure the energies
of a given quantum state the shorter the
lifetime of that
state will be before it changes and
the that means of course that the
information that we gain is soon out of
date
and it really means there is a blurry
uncertainty to the amount of energy that
there is
in any system and that includes a
completely empty system
a completely empty space would have
completely zero
energy and that would violate
the heisenberg uncertainty principle
because if there's
zero energy then there's zero
uncertainty
well nature seems to i've got this
covered in that it responds by making
empty space seethe with short-lived
virtual particle pairs it's as if it
pops
into existence as in the diagram a
particle
and its mirror anti-particle so perhaps
an electron and a positron
and that these borrow energy from
space-time
and briefly pop into existence and then
they re-annihilate with each other and
pay back
the energy that they borrowed within the
time limit set by
uncle heisenberg and the uncertainty
principle
and this enables the
empty space not to have zero energy on
average
and it means that the uncertainty
principle is satisfied but it's a very
very curious thing
it's not something we find in our
everyday experience it only really
happens
on these tiny tiny scales of individual
pairs of particles
but what stephen hawking realized was
that
if you had uh this process occurring
throughout space then it would sometimes
occur
near a black hole and perhaps over here
a particle pair has popped into
existence
and then recombined and paid the energy
back
perfectly normal thing to happen in
empty space
but down here another pair have been
created from nothing
by borrowing some energy from space-time
and then one of them has carelessly
fallen into the nearby black hole and
crossed the event horizon
and it's doomed at that point it can't
get back out
and so now its partner has nothing to
annihilate with
and is forced to become a real particle
now this seems to violate all sorts of
things
in particular it seems to violate the
idea of the conservation of
energy because we've created a particle
out of nothing
and we haven't said what became of the
particle fell in either
well they both become real particles
because they can't
annihilate with each other and that
means no one is paying back
the cosmic accountant as regards the
energy that they borrowed to get created
in the first place
but the answer to the problem is that
the blue particle that fell into the
black hole
is falling down a gravity well
and in the process it is releasing a lot
of gravitational potential energy
and that energy is used to pay back
the debt to the universe to space-time
that uh was borrowed in the first place
and enables them to become real
so you can't see the particles that fall
in but you can
see the particles that stream out and
become
real they appear to emerge from the edge
of the event horizon and stream outwards
and this is now called hawking radiation
and
named after the man himself and he
didn't just predict it he was able to
calculate exactly how much you would
expect to see
and the result of anything that is
giving off radiation
is that it has a temperature and
steven's calculation was
a very nice simple formula that you can
use
to work out the temperature of a black
hole
so i violated one of stephen's rules
here and had more than one equation in
this talk already
uh i think we're up to about three so
far
and i don't think they're terribly
frightening
this is the hawking temperature is one
over eight pi
times the mass so very simple you plug
in the mass
out comes the temperature and it's an
inverse relationship
the more massive the black hole
the lower the temperature and that's
quite a surprise you would think
more massive objects would be more
violent
but it turns out that they're not
they're more quiescent
because of this relationship and the
reason is that the
large massive black holes the event
horizon
is a long way from the center because of
that large
schwarzschild radius and so the slope of
gravity and the tidal forces and so on
associated with the slope are quite
modest
as you fall in across the event horizon
in fact for a supermassive black hole
you would probably
survive it intact you'd be doomed
eventually because you would
fall in and get too close to the
singularity and be
torn to shreds but the passage across
the event horizon would go
without a murmur whereas for a very
small black hole
gravity is very steep at the event
horizon because it's very near the
central point
and so for a small black hole you don't
have to move very far
to fall a long way down the hill
that means you can gain a lot of energy
without moving very far
and if you don't have to move very far
you can do it in a short time
and remember this virtual particle
process is on a time limit set by the
uncertainty principle
and so within the time limit you can
fall
far enough down a steep slope to pay
back a lot of energy
and that's why the steep slopes of small
black holes at the event horizon
have a very high hawking temperature
whereas the much more gentle slopes
you really have a tough time falling far
enough in the time limit
to give out any worthwhile amount of
energy
and so supermassive black holes have a
very very low
hawking temperature in fact i've cheated
a little bit because i've
this is the correct formula here it's
got a bunch of other constants in it
that stephen worked out it's got h
which is planck's constant turns up in
quantum mechanics everywhere
it's got the speed of light cubed on the
top there c
cubed it's got g the strength of gravity
well it would have wouldn't it
and it's also got kb which is
boltzmann's constant
which is all about turning energy into
temperature
so you need that in there to get the
units to work out
and we can work out that this is
1.2 times 10 to the power 23 degrees
kelvin
for every kilogram of mass
so uh on the top divided by the mass of
the object
so as the mass if you had a one kilogram
black hole it would have a temperature
of 1.2 times 10 to the 23 kelvin
which is a stupendous temperature
perhaps a more sensible
one is to look at the mass of the sun
going in there if you have an object of
one solar mass then it has a temperature
of
well six times ten to the minus eight
degrees kelvin
that's uh in the micro kelvin range
the uh millionths of fractions even the
billionths of a
of a degree so very very cold
temperature indeed for a
black hole of the mass of the sun and
that might be a bit of a surprise
in fact if we worked out
the temperature that you would get by
converting the moon into a black hole
uh it would be about a tenth of a
millimeter across
and that would have a temperature of 2.7
degrees
kelvin and i picked that example for a
very
uh special reason which we'll come back
to later on
so
this radiation is carrying energy away
we've had energy from space-time being
converted into these particles
one of which the black hole is swallowed
but the other one it has escaped and
the energy to create that escaping
hawking radiation particle
has come from the space-time and the
gravitational energy
of the black hole and so the
black hole loses energy as it's giving
off this hawking radiation
here's my other equation e equals m c
squared
if it's losing energy it's losing mass
and so
it's going to shrink and it's going to
get smaller and smaller
and eventually it'll evaporate
completely
how long will that take well of course
we can plug that into the maths as well
and don't worry too much about it i've
worked out for you here
um it's a bunch of constants
again times the cube of the mass
of the black hole and so
the more massive a black hole is the
longer its lifetime is going to be
that makes sense it's gonna a lot more
mass that it's got to lose
in order for it to uh evaporate
but it also means that very small black
holes have a very short
evaporation time and of course that
makes sense because
as we know they've got a very high
temperature
and so we can manipulate this number a
little bit
and again work out that for something of
the mass of the sun
it would take 2.1 times 10 to the power
years for it to evaporate that's
10 to the 67 years is a huge number
that's vastly greater than the uh age of
the universe
so really even for
stellar mass black holes
intermediate mass black holes
supermassive black holes
this is all a complete irrelevance the
hawking evaporation time
is so huge that it's
well beyond the range of anything that
we could conceive of in the
current universe so we just don't have
to worry about these black holes
evaporating
but smaller objects have shorter
lifetimes as we saw
if we wanted to work out the mass of an
object
that was going to have a lifetime
less than the age of the universe the
age of the universe is 13.7
billion years so let's go for 10 billion
and we plug that into the numbers and it
works out
at a mass of 100 billion kilograms
this is how i did it i said we need to
go from
10 to the 67 to this
age which is 10 to the 10 a billion is
10 to the nine one more lot of ten
ten to the ten so i've got to lose 57
powers of ten it's a cube law
so i can divide by 57 by 3 and get 19
and i have to take 19 away from the
19 powers of 10 away from the mass of
the sun
the mass of the sun's about 10 to the
power 30 kilograms
30 minus 19 is 11. so we need about 10
to the power 11 kilograms or 100 billion
but what is 100 billion kilograms well
mount everest is a thousand times more
than that it's 10 to the 14 kilograms
so if we were able to make a black hole
that was
not the size of mount everest but a
thousand times
smaller so i don't know the gog magog
hills or something
we converted those into uh
a black hole then it would have a
lifetime
roughly 10 billion years
as you can see there because mount
everest is a thousand times longer
and because of this cube law here
uh we can work out that it will last 10
times longer so
if we took the whole of mount everest it
would have a lifetime of
100 billion years so just
under 10 times the age of the universe
so we can easily do these calculations
so as i said that the temperature for
this a stellar mass black hole would be
uh 0.1 of a micro kelvin a tenth of a
millionth of a degree but in the real
world
the temperature of space because of the
cosmic microwave background radiation
is 2.725 degrees kelvin
so anything that is colder than the
cosmic microwave background
is actually going to receive more energy
in from the microwaves
than it's giving out so any even for a
stellar mass black hole in the current
universe
it will be slowly growing and feeding
on the cosmic microwaves and
it's that's going to massively be faster
than the rate at which it is trying to
evaporate
with this temperature it's 10 million
times
faster so again in the real universe
the uh any of these
astrophysical black holes from stellar
mass upwards
are going to feed rather than evaporate
but this brings us to the special case
that i mentioned before
of turning the moon into a black hole be
about 10 micrometers across
and would have a temperature of 2.7
degrees kelvin
the same temperature as the cosmic
microwave background
so it would neither grow nor shrink it
would stay about the
now same course the sharp people among
you will have spotted that
as the universe expands that
temperature of the cosmic microwave
radiation is constantly
going down to lower and lower energies
and so this boundary of one moon mass
is a moving target and uh
eventually the temperature of the
universe will be cold enough
for even a stellar mass black hole to
evaporate
in the extreme distant future
we said that a mount everest mass black
hole would evaporate in
100 billion years but a slightly smaller
one
that we said that had a massive 10
billion kilograms
would be evaporating around about now
but of course when i say around about
now we've got to remember that when we
look out into the distant universe we're
looking
back in time to events at earlier epochs
and so if we saw a black hole
that had lived for 10 billion years
but was three billion years ago at the
three billion light years distance
then it would have had its origin just
after the big bang
at 13 billion years ago and so you can
trade distance for time
in terms of looking for the uh
evaporation of primordial black holes of
different masses
that might have been formed way back in
the early universe
and that means we can search for any
that are in the range of
a million tons to a billion tonnes or
more
and that we would be seeing those going
through their final act
of evaporation any time out there in the
universe about now depending on how far
away we look
and so the idea then is
do we see any what do we call primordial
black holes the title of this
talk these black holes that might have
been formed in the earliest
time of the universe is that a
possibility
and would we be able to see them
reaching the end of their lives as they
evaporated
if they were of those sorts of modest
masses
well it's a very very interesting
question because
to form a black hole you need to pack
enough material together
to get it within that starchild radius
and so you'd think perhaps at first
sight that
the hot dense state of the big bang had
all the right conditions
for having that high density
and so you'd think that things would
naturally tend to collapse
into black holes and in fact you might
be quite surprised
that uh not more of the material had
been eaten up in that way right at the
beginning
but to form a black hole you don't need
high density
you need a local excess density
if you're a high density region
surrounded by low density regions that's
fine
but if you're surrounded by other high
density regions
then the gravity of those regions
pulling out
will be about the same as your gravity
pulling in and down
and so you won't be able to collapse
so you need this idea of a local excess
density
and so actually it's not the case that
the
big bang just being dense
is enough for it to collapse to form
myriad small black holes it would need
local fluctuations to be quite extreme
enough
to trigger the formation of
these these primordial black holes and
that's much more of
a difficult and problematic process
but it still could have happened we
still
we see of course the undulations and the
variations
in the cosmic microwave background and
that gives us a clue to how
smooth or uneven the early universe
would be
and whether or not these uh primordial
black holes
would have stood a chance of forming
now stephen hawking pointed out that
quantum mechanics tells us
that the smallest possible black hole
is one of the planck mass from quantum
mechanics
which works out to be quite a sizable 22
micrograms
that's quite big for anything in quantum
mechanics
it would be extraordinarily tiny 10 to
the minus 35
meters it's a very very tiny size
but it will also have an immense hawking
temperature
that should in fact say 10 to the power
36 degrees
kelvin there's a minus sign crept in
there that is wrong
and so it would also evaporate
through that hawking radiation and be
gone
after 5 times 10 to the minus 39 of a
second
once of course the surrounding universe
had cooled
below that 10 to the 36 kelvin
so tiny quantum black holes like this
would have all evaporated in the very
first instance of the cooling of the big
bang
and be gone from our record now
okay so we would not be able to see them
for a black hole to have survived from
the big bang until around about now
and be observable to us it has to have
lived that sort of
10 billion years uh age
and for such a black hole
it would probably have had to have begun
with that mass of 10 to the 11 kilograms
otherwise it would have been uh and
evaporated
by now so these are the ones that we're
interested in
my question really is do we find them
out there
now the thing with black hole
evaporation is that it's a runaway
process
as they shrink as we've seen
smaller
say it's like they sort of imply you
need solicitors to sign that you're
legitimate trustees but i'm not
done it for you so i'm saying that it's
an
it's a runaway process as they shrink
the temperature rises
so they shrink faster so it rises some
more at smaller scales
and what we would see is during the last
fraction of a second they would have the
power output of tens of thousands of
stars
and look like a supernova
and so the search is on looking for uh
objects going bang out there in the dark
in the distant universe that might be in
galaxies or they might be
outside of galaxies who says that they
have to be anything to do with a galaxy
they could be anywhere in space
i'm just going bang looking somewhat
like a supernova
but the spectrum would be different this
would have the perfect
unmodified spectrum of hawking radiation
with no absorption lines in it
that we get from stars because of their
elemental composition these black holes
are not made of elements
and so they don't have those absorption
lines in their spectrum
so we would be able to tell the
difference so the chase is on to go and
try and detect
these uh monsters from the echoes of the
big bang
and see whether we can find anything at
all
well what have we found well we found
some interesting objects
the uh ogle micro lensing
survey has found very recently
six candidate events for wandering black
holes
now they're objects that are in that
range of
half of earth mass to 20 earth masses
so they could be other things they could
be rogue planets wandering
between the stars but they could be
these primordial black holes
with a reasonably large mass that has
meant that they've persisted
from the big bang to now without
evaporating
so in addition to looking for the the
flash we can look
to see their gravitational lensing event
as they pass in front of other stars
and cause this this brightening curve
like this
it's a second way of detecting them and
the third way of detecting
them is if they happen to engage in a
merger
and this is a simulation of a pair of
black holes merging with each other
spiraling inwards and giving off gravity
waves in the process
and so another strong way of searching
for primordial black holes
is now to look for the faint ripples
that would have come from small black
holes
merging with each other or perhaps
merging with other slightly larger ones
and you know we've detected the first
several events of merging black holes
now
the first event was a few years ago and
detected by
ligo and uh detected the
change in the light path lengths
of the beams of light sent down these
two four kilometer
arms and back it's a bit like a giant
version
of the michaelson morley experiment that
we talked about in the first place
only this is looking for
not a change in the speed of light due
to the
movement of the earth which is
impossible
but it is looking for a change in the
length
the size the metric of space-time
itself uh which would cause the light
travel time to change
and here's the data that was acquired
for the first
merger that was detected we've got the
simulation on the right here
and the two observatories saw
the characteristic uh signal as the
frequency and amplitude
increases and then suddenly stops when
the merger occurs
and there's the sound of the black hole
merging i'll shut up and let you listen
to it
there it is that characteristic
chirp in the audio there is the uh
merger of two black holes it's a an
audio rendering of this
graph i'll let it play one more time
there it goes so
we're hoping that we might be able to
detect some of these smaller black holes
and by their mergers or by their
transit events or by them
evaporating and creating supernovae
one idea of course is that maybe these
wandering
primordial black holes could account
for quite a lot of the uh missing mass
the so-called dark matter that we
believe
must be out there filling the galaxies
with perhaps between uh
naught and ninety percent of their
mass of some galaxies our milky way and
others seem to have around ninety
percent
dark matter we've discovered some
galaxies that have zero percent
dark matter and everything in between
and
it could be that these uh small black
holes could be accounting for many of
them
we're most likely to either see them as
these
strange looking supernovae or we'll be
detecting them gravitationally or
perhaps because they wander in front of
another star
and cause a microlensing event
now there's one possible candidate in
our backyard
which is that we haven't been able to
find
the so-called planet nine that seems to
be deflecting the path
of a lot of the scattered disc of
uh outer transneptunian objects out
beyond the kuiper belt
there are sedna and a number of other
wandering dwarf planets and uh asteroids
that are apparently
all marshaled on one side of the solar
system
and the theory was that perhaps there
was a large heavyweight body
planet nine out there that could be
causing them to all shuffle to one side
unfortunately surveys with very
sensitive infrared telescopes like the
wise telescope
have failed to find anything visible
and so the conclusion now might be
maybe it's not visible maybe what is out
there orbiting the sun
is a small black hole and when we say
small around about five times the mass
of the earth would be
the sort of mass we would be looking for
to explain the behavior of these
strange objects in the outer solar
system
so that's really quite a small black
hole indeed
and is likely therefore to be the
product
of that primordial black hole formation
rather than any other process it's too
small to have come from the normal
stellar collapse
we also see imprinted on the cosmic
microwave background
these strange dark markings
when you zoom right in with high
resolution onto the cosmic microwave
background these bright regions that we
normally see as the tiny specks
seem to be overlaid by a pattern of dark
blobs and as the slide says
are these the shadows of dark holes
perhaps they are dark matter black holes
from the beginning of time primordial
black holes made by the collapse of dark
matter
during the very earliest times of
the solas the universe's formation
and now they're blotting out the light
of the cosmic microwave background
so the shadows of dark holes i don't
know the answer
nobody does it's a fascinating question
and we are really are digging into some
of the obscure corners of astronomy
at this point now i've just got two more
slides
um and i'm going to ponder these to you
as
food for thought um
here we have the schwarzschild formula
which we looked at in the beginning
that the radius of a black hole is 2g
over c
squared m so if you know the mass you
can work out
the spot shard radius
okay well i happen to know that the mass
of the universe is 8.8 times 10 to the
52 kilograms
that's quite heavy it's quite a lot of
stuff
but it's only six protons per cubic
meter because most of space is empty
so let's plug that into the formula well
we've got the values of g
and c there and c squared conveniently
laid out so my uh
young astronomers could easily do the
calculation whip out the calculator
and work out that the schwarzschild
radius
of a black hole with the mass of the
universe
is 13.7 billion light years
you may have heard that number before
the universe is 13.7 billion
years old and a
therefore a light beam would have been
able to travel 13.7 billion light years
in the age of the universe and it is a
great curiosity
that the age of the universe
and the size of the universe seems to be
such that
the radius of the uh equals exactly what
you need
for the universe to be um
inside its own black hole schwarzschild
radius
this is actually saying that the
universe is right near the critical
density
that should cause it to
slow down to a halt but of course we now
have
learned of the existence of dark energy
perhaps
which might change all of that
and i'm not really saying that the
universe is a black hole
in fact it's more like a white hole as
described by einstein
effectively a time reversed black hole
and secondly there's good reason to
believe that there is more
universe outside the observable range
that we can see
and therefore if that too has a simple
similar structure to the stuff we can
see
then this calculation is completely
irrelevant it's just a quirk of the
mathematics
but nobody really knows if that is a
significant thing or not
and finally the final slide i'm going to
do something a little bit mind bending
at the other end of the scale
we can use that schwarzschild formula
and instead of plugging in the whole of
the mass of the universe
let's plug in the mass of an electron
instead
that's 10 to the minus 31 kilograms a
tiny mass
we plug that into the schwarzschild
formula and say
what would the size of black hole be if
it had that mass
well it's very very tiny indeed 10 to
the minus 57 meters
which is almost too small to be
uh believable but we can't quite do it
that's you know not so fast
unfortunately the schwarzschild formula
is not the last word on this
because the electron is charged and
because it's spinning
we actually need to use a rather more
complicated version of general
relativity
called the uh ker newman metric and
if we do that then we get
the equivalent of the schwarzschild
radius at 1.9 times 10 to the minus 13
meters
which is astonishingly close to the
compton wavelength of an electron the
corresponding wavelength of it and
this would tell us that the electron
might be
naked ring singularity it's of a size
that
is such that it doesn't have a black
hole and because
event horizon around it so it's a
spinning
uh ring with a singularity in the center
and maybe that's what an electron really
is
and so maybe everything is made of black
holes
and on that note i'll shut up